## Welcome to Genna Campain's Data Visualization Page

### _Journalism in the Age of Data Review_

Journalism in the Age of Data by Geoff McGhee explains how the field of journalism is changing with a new focus on data visualization and discusses some benefits and drawbacks of this shift. The video describes the high demand for infographic designers and how this demand reflects a dramatic change in how news stories are being written. It also identifies the problems associated with current use of data visualization to recommend how it can be improved to better communicate with the audience. Although the 2010 video is relatively outdated for such a fast-changing field, it makes good points about how the relevance of data visualization is increasing. As it mentions, rapidly developing technologies allow for more interactive and complex data visualizations every day which have given news articles new dimensions. Furthermore, as people increasingly depend on online news media, the possibilities for visualizations extend far beyond those of regular printed newspapers and magazines. These new technologies have led news organizations to hire specialists in infographic design in order to catch readers’ attention and expand the amount of information that can be presented in each article. Overall, the trends described in the video have continued to occur over the last 10 years since the article was written to the point. Today, it is fairly easy to find a visualization for most data-based questions which shows the truth behind McGhee’s predictions. Furthermore, McGhee’s description of the problems facing journalists trying to adapt to a world of visualization-heavy writing is still relevant. Likely, most readers who frequently read news stories have come across a visualization that didn’t quite hit the target for quick and concise communication of information. McGhee identifies the many available tools to create data visualization as a potential cause of bad visualizations being produced as anyone can decide to make a visualization without any prior knowledge of design techniques. In the years since the video’s publication, even more tools have been created to make producing visualizations something for the masses. However, in his criticism of the changes in the field of visualization, McGhee did not elaborate on the positive changes that could come from new people with different backgrounds contributing their ideas. With an ever-increasing number of people trying new visualizations and exploring the possibilities, positive changes have undoubtedly been made in the field. Finally, McGhee makes a strong point about the need to tell a story in a visualization that can be easily interpreted without relying too heavily on a flamboyant design. As he addresses, combining art with information communication is a difficult task that requires balancing many different elements. After all, an unattractive visualization is unlikely to catch people’s attention long enough to tell its story, but a very attractive visualization that doesn’t tell any story is just as useless. The expanding number of technologies available to make newer and more complex design elements keeps this problem relevant as new techniques create new problems that need to be addresses with balancing look and content. Additionally, as more data becomes constantly available, the attention that someone is willing to pay to a single news story is decreasing. As a result, more and more information needs to be conveyed in less time for readers to get the entire story of a visualization. All in all, Journalism in the Age of Data made very strong points about the use of data visualizations in news media, the benefits and drawbacks of its growing popularity, and the need to stay focused on the original purpose of visualizations even as the field continues to change.

### Bad Data Guide

1.	Consult data source for problems with data collection or storage process (ex: missing values, inconsistency in spelling or formatting, badly chosen categories, units unspecified, error values)
2.	Fix simple problems including:
a)	Garbled text – encoding problem that can generally be fixed using spreadsheet application
b)	Line ending inconsistency – save file in general purpose text editor (without formatting specific to operating system)
c)	Data in PDF form – use Tabula or Acrobat Pro to export to Excel
d)	Data too specific – use Pivot Table feature or a SQL database to aggregate
e)	Data mixed with formatting/annotations – identify any extra headers or formatting among rows and don’t include in analysis
f)	Aggregation with missing values – don’t compare aggregates when different values are missing for two categories unless missing values can be 0
g)	Margin-of-error above 10% or unknown or non-random/biased sampling – do not use data
h)	Edited data – find original source that has not been edited and keep track of changes made and justifications
i)	Natural/seasonal variation or inflation skewing – use recognized methods for adjusting appropriately
j)	Limited timeframe – start comparison a few data points after data begins
k)	Incorrect frame of reference – use appropriate data to compare with
3.	 Get help from an expert with problems related to the collection process/storage process, untrustworthy sources or potential problems with data reliability
